---
title: "On Being Unable to Sacrifice the Puer Aeturnus"
date: "2018-09-21"
---

From Edward Edinger's Ego and Archetype:

> The psychotherapist frequently sees cases of this sort. Such a
> person considers himself as a most promising individual. He is full
> of talents and potentialities. One of his complaints is often that
> his capacities and interests are too wide-ranging. He is cursed with
> a plethora of riches. He could do anything but can’t decide on one
> thing in particular. The problem is that he is all promises and no
> fulfillment. In order to make a real accomplishment he must
> sacrifice a number of other potentialities. He must
> give up his identification with original unconscious wholeness and
> voluntarily accept being a real fragment instead of an unreal whole.
> To be something in reality he must give up being everything in
> potentia.
> _The puer aeternus archetype is one of the images of the Self, but
> to be identified with it means that one never brings any reality
> to birth._

In a different book by a psychologist, we find another example of the Puer Aeturnus...

From "The Defining Decade," by Meg Jay. Chapter 5, "The Customized Life":

>Sessions with Ian did not go smoothly. Like other twentysomethings
raised on the promise of doing anything, Ian flinched when faced
with the here and now. A life of infinite possibilities had felt
like a disorienting and overwhelming burden, but it had also been a
liberating fantasy. The concept of “any thing” sounded limitless and
exciting, while in comparison digital design sounded limiting… and
boring. When we talked about actually moving toward a career in
digital design, Ian balked. He did not want to “just have some
office job and work nine to five like everyone else.” A braver form
of self-definition dares to be affirmative. Ian needed to move from
talking about what he wasn’t going to do to talking about what he
was going to do. “Being against something is easy,” I said. “What
are you for?” To Ian, claiming was conforming. By starting a career,
he imagined he was agreeing to decades of the status quo. Saying yes
to one concrete thing felt like saying no to an interesting or
limitless life. In fact, it’s the other way around. If Ian didn’t
say yes to something, his life was going to become unremarkable and
limited. I would say, “You need to claim something.”

>And Ian would say, “But claiming something feels like losing
everything else.” Or Ian would say, “I don’t want to settle for some
ordinary thing.” And I would say, “I’m not talking about settling.
I’m talking about starting. Twentysomethings who don’t get started
wind up with blank résumés and sounded limiting… and boring. When we
talked about actually moving toward a career in digital design, Ian
balked. He did not want to “just have some office job and work nine
to five like everyone else.” Ian was on a sneaky search for glory.
He suffered less from the tyranny of the should than he did from the
tyranny of the should-not. His life wasn’t about getting A’s or even
the need to realize his potential, at least not in any mainstream
way. Conventionality wasn’t his niche. Ian’s search for glory was
the lure of being different, so he displayed what has been called a
common symptom of youth: “the dread of doing what has been done
before.” If he ever chose something to do for work, he didn’t want
it to be some same-old, everyday thing; his life could be unique. I
didn’t completely disagree.

>Distinctiveness is a fundamental part of identity. We develop a
clearer sense of ourselves by firming up the boundaries between
ourselves and others. I am who I am because of how I am different
from those around me. There is a point to my life because it cannot
be carried out in exactly the same way by any other person.
Differentness is part of what makes us who we are. It gives our
lives meaning. But different is simple. Like the easiest way to
explain black is to call it the opposite of white, often the first
thing we know about ourselves is not what we are—it’s what we
aren’t. We mark ourselves as not-this or not-that, the way Ian was
quick to say he didn’t want to sit at the same desk all day. But
self-definition cannot end there. An identity or a career cannot be
built around what you don’t want. We have to shift from a negative
identity, or a sense of what I’m not, to a positive one, or a sense
of what I am. This takes courage. A braver form of self-definition
dares to be affirmative. Ian needed to move from talking about what
he wasn’t going to do to talking about what he was going to do.
“Being against something is easy,” I said. “What are you for?” To
Ian, claiming was conforming. By starting a career, he imagined he
was agreeing to decades of the status quo. Saying yes to one
concrete thing felt like saying no to an interesting or limitless
life. In fact, it’s the other way around. If Ian didn’t say yes to
something, his life was going to become unremarkable and limited.
When I sat with Ian, I sometimes thought about a thirty-one-year-old
woman I worked with who told me she’d spent her twenties changing
her hair color as often as she changed jobs: bright purple when
answering phones at a spa, white-blond when temping, deep red when
Mystery Shopping, chestnut brown when working in a preschool. When
she became engaged, she confided that she planned to quit her latest
job. She said, “I can’t stand my boss right now. I’ve got a wedding
and a honeymoon to plan, and soon I’ll have babies and I’ll get to
think about something else for a while.” When I asked how her
fiancé, an elementary school teacher, felt about being the sole
breadwinner for a soon-to-be growing family, she shrugged nervously.
And this client made me think of the thirty-nine-year-old female who
told me, “At this point in my life, if I’m going to work and pay for
child care and be away from my kids all day, I need the work to be
interesting and well paid. But I can’t get that sort of job. In my
twenties, I didn’t really deal with what I was going to do about
work. In my thirties, I had kids. We need the money and I have to
work. But you wouldn’t believe the jobs I can’t even get. I go for
jobs and people just look at me like, ‘Why haven’t you done
something by now?’ I wish someone had told me to think about my
résumé a long time ago.” Or I thought about the forty-four-year-old
male client with a new baby who said to me, “You know, if I’d had a
decent psychologist in my twenties, I probably could have started my
career before I was thirty-five and had a family before I was in my
forties. If you’re still doing this in twenty years, I’m sending my
son to you.” When I asked what he would like me to say to his son,
my client replied, “That you can’t pull some great career out of a
hat in your thirties. You’ve got to start in your twenties.” With
these clients in mind, over the next many months, my sessions with
Ian went more or less this way: I would say, “You need to claim
something.”

>And Ian would say, “But claiming something feels like losing
everything else.” Or Ian would say, “I don’t want to settle for some
ordinary thing.” And I would say, “I’m not talking about settling.
I’m talking about starting. Twentysomethings who don’t get started
wind up with blank résumés and out-of-touch lives only to settle far
more down the road. What’s so original about that?”